..
   Copyright 2002 Jonathan Bartlett

   Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this
   document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License,
   Version 1.1 or any later version published by the Free Software
   Foundation; with no Invariant Sections, with no Front-Cover Texts,
   and with no Back-Cover Texts.  A copy of the license is included in fdl.xml


.. _wherenextch:

Moving On from Here
===================

Congratulations on getting this far. You should now have a basis for
understanding the issues involved in many areas of programming. Even if
you never use assembly language again, you have gained a valuable
perspective and mental framework for understanding the rest of computer
science.

There are essentially three methods to learn to program:

-  From the Bottom Up - This is how this book teaches. It starts with
   low-level programming, and works toward more generalized teaching.

-  From the Top Down - This is the opposite direction. This focuses on
   what you want to do with the computer, and teaches you how to break
   it down more and more until you get to the low levels.

-  From the Middle - This is characterized by books which teach a
   specific programming language or API. These are not as concerned with
   concepts as they are with specifics.

Different people like different approaches, but a good programmer takes
all of them into account. The bottom-up approaches help you understand
the machine aspects, the top-down approaches help you understand the
problem-area aspects, and the middle approaches help you with practical
questions and answers. To leave any of these aspects out would be a
mistake.

Computer Programming is a vast subject. As a programmer, you will need
to be prepared to be constantly learning and pushing your limits. These
books will help you do that. They not only teach their subjects, but
also teach various ways and methods of *thinking*. As Alan Perlis said,
"A language that doesn't affect the way you think about programming is
not worth knowing"
(http://www.cs.yale.edu/homes/perlis-alan/quotes.html). If you are
constantly looking for new and better ways of doing and thinking, you
will make a successful programmer. If you do not seek to enhance
yourself, "A little sleep, a little slumber, a little folding of the
hands to rest - and poverty will come on you like a bandit and scarcity
like an armed man." (Proverbs 24:33-34 NIV). Perhaps not quite that
severe, but still, it is best to always be learning.

These books were selected because of their content and the amount of
respect they have in the computer science world. Each of them brings
something unique. There are many books here. The best way to start would
be to look through online reviews of several of the books, and find a
starting point that interests you.

From the Bottom Up
------------------

This list is in the best reading order I could find. It's not
necessarily easiest to hardest, but based on subject matter.

-  Programming from the Ground Up by Jonathan Bartlett

-  Introduction to Algorithms by Thomas H. Cormen, Charles E. Leiserson,
   and Ronald L. Rivest

-  The Art of Computer Programming by Donald Knuth (3 volume set -
   volume 1 is the most important)

-  Programming Languages by Samuel N. Kamin

-  Modern Operating Systems by Andrew Tanenbaum

-  Linkers and Loaders by John Levine

-  Computer Organization and Design: The Hardware/Software Interface by
   David Patterson and John Hennessy

From the Top Down
-----------------

These books are arranged from the simplest to the hardest. However, they
can be read in any order you feel comfortable with.

-  How to Design Programs by Matthias Felleisen, Robert Bruce Findler,
   Matthew Flatt, and Shiram Krishnamurthi, available online at
   http://www.htdp.org/

-  Simply Scheme: An Introduction to Computer Science by Brian Harvey
   and Matthew Wright

-  How to Think Like a Computer Scientist: Learning with Python by Allen
   Downey, Jeff Elkner, and Chris Meyers, available online at
   http://www.greenteapress.com/thinkpython/

-  Structure and Interpretation of Computer Programs by Harold Abelson
   and Gerald Jay Sussman with Julie Sussman, available online at
   http://mitpress.mit.edu/sicp/

-  Design Patterns by Erich Gamma, Richard Helm, Ralph Johnson, and John
   Vlissides

-  What not How: The Rules Approach to Application Development by Chris
   Date

-  The Algorithm Design Manual by Steve Skiena

-  Programming Language Pragmatics by Michael Scott

-  Essentials of Programming Languages by Daniel P. Friedman, Mitchell
   Wand, and Christopher T. Haynes

From the Middle Out
-------------------

Each of these is the best book on its subject. If you need to know these
languages, these will tell you all you need to know.

-  Programming Perl by Larry Wall, Tom Christiansen, and Jon Orwant

-  Common LISP: The Language by Guy R. Steele

-  ANSI Common LISP by Paul Graham

-  The C Programming Language by Brian W. Kernighan and Dennis M.
   Ritchie

-  The Waite Group's C Primer Plus by Stephen Prata

-  The C++ Programming Language by Bjarne Stroustrup

-  Thinking in Java by Bruce Eckel, available online at
   http://www.mindview.net/Books/TIJ/

-  The Scheme Programming Language by Kent Dybvig

-  Linux Assembly Language Programming by Bob Neveln

Specialized Topics
------------------

These books are the best books that cover their topic. They are thorough
and authoritative. To get a broad base of knowledge, you should read
several outside of the areas you normally program in.

-  Practical Programming - Programming Pearls and More Programming
   Pearls by Jon Louis Bentley

-  Databases - Understanding Relational Databases by Fabian Pascal

-  Project Management - The Mythical Man-Month by Fred P. Brooks

-  UNIX Programming - The Art of UNIX Programming by Eric S. Raymond,
   available online at http://www.catb.org/~esr/writings/taoup/

-  UNIX Programming - Advanced Programming in the UNIX Environment by W.
   Richard Stevens

-  Network Programming - UNIX Network Programming (2 volumes) by W.
   Richard Stevens

-  Generic Programming - Modern C++ Design by Andrei Alexandrescu

-  Compilers - The Art of Compiler Design: Theory and Practice by Thomas
   Pittman and James Peters

-  Compilers - Advanced Compiler Design and Implementation by Steven
   Muchnick

-  Development Process - Refactoring: Improving the Design of Existing
   Code by Martin Fowler, Kent Beck, John Brant, William Opdyke, and Don
   Roberts

-  Typesetting - Computers and Typesetting (5 volumes) by Donald Knuth

-  Cryptography - Applied Cryptography by Bruce Schneier

-  Linux - Professional Linux Programming by Neil Matthew, Richard
   Stones, and 14 other people

-  Linux Kernel - Linux Device Drivers by Alessandro Rubini and Jonathan
   Corbet

-  Open Source Programming - The Cathedral and the Bazaar: Musings on
   Linux and Open Source by an Accidental Revolutionary by Eric S.
   Raymond

-  Computer Architecture - Computer Architecture: A Quantitative
   Approach by David Patterson and John Hennessy

Further Resources on Assembly Language
--------------------------------------

In assembly language, your best resources are on the web.

-  http://www.linuxassembly.org/ - a great resource for Linux assembly
   language programmers

-  http://www.sandpile.org/ - a repository of reference material on x86,
   x86-64, and compatible processors

-  http://www.x86.org/ - Dr. Dobb's Journal Microprocessor Resources

-  http://www.drpaulcarter.com/pcasm/ - Dr. Paul Carter's PC Assembly
   Language Page

-  http://webster.cs.ucr.edu/ - The Art of Assembly Home Page

-  http://www.intel.com/design/pentium/manuals/ - Intel's manuals for
   their processors

-  http://www.janw.easynet.be/ - Jan Wagemaker's Linux assembly language
   examples

-  http://www.azillionmonkeys.com/qed/asm.html - Paul Hsieh's x86
   Assembly Page
